The goal of any program is to do something useful. (Useful is admittedly subjective, but a program should output something nonetheless.) Java, as well as many other languages, use object-oriented programming to encode real-world things in order to do something useful with them. In my opinion, the best way to approach this topic is by examining Java classes first. A class is a blueprint that contains all the elements of whatever real-world thing being mirrored in code. In my example I create a Bird class with four instance variables, a constructor, and two methods. The four instance variables describe the conditions or states that the Bird object can have. For example, myFirstBird is a PARROT, with a 42-inch wingspan, a flight speed of 21.34 miles per hour, and is SINGING. These four attributes are set by the Bird class as a blueprint for every Bird object created by the user. Now that we have values for the instance variables, we need a way to bind them together as a single Bird object called myFirstBird. This binding of variables is done by the constructor. When an instance of the Bird class is given a name, and the "new" keyword is used to pass the values to the Bird constructor, we create a Bird object. This is the key difference between classes and objects. The class provides a framework for creating objects but does not actually store any information. It is not until we pass values to the constructor and allocate memory that the Bird object is born. For the purposes of this discussion post I didn't add a default constructor because it performs the same function as a parameterized constructor. The default constructor just assigns values to the instance variables without explicitly declaring them. If we wanted to change the values, we need a "setter", or mutator method. Our Bird class provides a way to change the BirdBehavior variable through a method called setBirdBehavior. Using the name of the Bird object and dot notation, the value of BirdBehavior can be altered after the object is created. Without this mutator method there would be no way to change the variable's value after the object is created. There are many more variations and techniques to using classes, but they all do the same job. The class provides the blueprint for all object instances belonging to that class.
